>> Anjana Vakil: The next topic we're
gonna need in our functional programming
toolkit in addition to
purity is recursion.
This is a functional
programmer's best friend.
Can anybody tell me what
a recursive function is,
have you encountered this term before,
a recursive function?
Yeah, okay, we've heard heard it.
>> Speaker 2: A function
that calls itself.
>> Anjana Vakil: It is a function that
calls itself as part of what it does.
It could also be, for example,
a function that indirectly calls
itself by calling another function
that calls it, let's say.
But in today's [LAUGH] functional land,
we're going to talk about
recursion as a recursive function
is a function that uses itself
as part of its own computation.
>> Anjana Vakil: And
in functional programming,
we're gonna use recursion whenever we
need to do something multiple times.
Instead of what we're typically used to
in imperative programming loops, so for
loops, while loops,
all those kind of loops.
Those are things that don't even exist in
some purely functional languages, and that
even though we were using them in some of
our pure functions earlier, because it was
all right since we were wrapping them
up in the deterministic pure function.
We're gonna try to avoid from now on to
get ourselves into the functional mindset.
And in functional programming,
we don't change
the value of A in each loop of a four,
instead,
what we'll do is recursively call
the function again with a new value of A.
So we're gonna get a lot of
practice with this today.
And it is one of the more mind bending
things in functional [LAUGH] programming,
I think, recursion,
it's just, sometimes it gets.
So let's take a moment to
really think about it.
Okay, we said before
that imperative code and
functional code are kinda
in contrast to one another.
So, inside of the imperative programming
paradigm where we're saying do this,
do that, do this other thing.
The way that we execute code multiple
times is with Iteration, right?
Some kind of loop where we say,
on each run through this loop,
change the value of this let a of array,
or what have you.
So that the first time that loop
executes a is gonna be one thing,
and the second time it's going it's gonna
be another thing, and so on and so forth.
That means we have a value a,
in this case, inside of the loop,
that changes over time, and
that is what we call state in a program.
When we have a value that could change
over time or does change over time,
we are dealing with a stateful program.
The values at that particular point in
time matter to the execution of this
program.
And that is a no-no for
a functional programmer.
Because if you have state,
if you have values changing over time,
that means you might not
accurately predict what
the state is at any given point
of your function execution.
And that might lead to surprising effects,
right?
If anyone has ever had the situation where
you thought that this method from this
library was gonna return one thing, but
then surprise, they changed the API and
now it returns a totally different thing.
And so now the value of that thing is,
it has changed from a month ago,
when your tests all passed, to today,
when they don't, and your boss is mad.
That is why we wan to avoid state,
it gives us headaches.
So functional programs are stateless
as much as possible, and how do we do
something multiple times if I can't change
the value of a variable in a for loop?
That's what our friend recursion
is here to help us do.
So, in recursion,
we're still taking a computation, and
executing it multiple times
with different values, but
instead of doing it in a stateful
way with assignment to variables
that the value of which changes,
we're doing it in a functional way.
And instead of imperatively saying on
each run of this function, do this and
do that and do this other thing,
we are giving this self reference.
The recursive function is referencing
itself to execute that same
function code another time,
but with different inputs.
So this is the imperative, this is
sort of like the imperative functional
divide in one small domain area of how
do we execute code multiple times?
How do we do stuff over and over again?
Okay, so as we said, we wanna avoid
iteration, we wanna focus on recursion.
All right, let's take a look at a typical,
this is a little bit old school
JavaScript, but this really makes clear
how stateful a for loop is in JavaScript.
So here we have a function sum,
where we start out with a total of 0,
and then we enter a for loop.
And this is using the traditional syntax,
[LAUGH] where we define
the initial value of a variable.
We define a stopping condition where
when the state of the program,
when the state of this variable,
the value of this variable has reached
a particular condition we wanna stop.
So in this case, as long as i is less
than the length of the numbers array,
keep going, and then on each run,
increment the value of i.
>> Anjana Vakil: So here, for
each index in the array, we're pulling out
the number at that index, and
we're updating the total.
Now this plus plus here,
this is really illustrating, and
it's a little bit clearer to see
than in the newer for of syntax,
this is really illustrating how do this,
then that, how imperative a for loop is.
We're telling JavaScript
exactly what to do,
saying, first run this line
of code with i equals 0,
then increment i,
then check if the condition is met.
Are we still satisfied?
Then run this block of code again
with the incremented value.
So, this is just to illustrate,
there's a lot of baked in imperativeness
in these things that we use every day,
that we probably aren't
even thinking about, right?
Just think for let a of array whatever,
but really what's happening under
the hood is a whole bunch of
imperative values changing.
And when we mess up in thinking about,
okay, at this run of the for loop,
I think I have the right values,
blah, blah,
blah, it becomes very easy to
introduce unexpected bugs in our code.
>> Anjana Vakil: Let's look
at the alternative here, so
this is a recursive sum function.
Same API, we take in an array numbers.
>> Anjana Vakil: And then,
>> Anjana Vakil: We make some decisions.
[LAUGH] Every recursive function
needs two things unless
you want to crash your computer.
[LAUGH] One is a recursive case because
if it didn't have a time where it
was calling itself,
we wouldn't call it a recursive function.
But especially important,
don't forget, every recursive function
needs what we call a base case,
meaning a non-recursive case.
Because if we only had the recursive case,
we would keep recursing over and
over, and over, and
over, and over, and over,
and over again until?
>> Speaker 3: You end up
in the void in inception.
>> Speaker 4: Stack overflow.
>> Anjana Vakil: Yes, and we get what's
called a stack overflow, In JavaScript,
it even says too much recursion.
Sorry, in Firefox's implementation,
the error is too much recursion,
bad functional programmer.
[LAUGH] So
that's why we need the base case.
It's sort of the bottom to our dream
within a dream within a dream,
the spinning top, if you will,
or the fallen over I don't know,
I haven't seen that movie a long time,
anyway.
So in this case,
we need a base case in which we are not
gonna call ourself the sum function again.
And in this case, it's, okay, if we just
have one number, hooray, we're done.
If I give you an array with one number and
I ask you for the sum,
you're just gonna give me back the value
of the one thing in the array, right?
Everything else, longer arrays,
is going to fall into the recursive case.
So we're gonna pull out the first
element and then we're gonna
recursively do this operation
again on a smaller array over and
over and
over again until we get a single number.
And then we're gonna pop out
of the recursive call and
add it to the previous number and pop out,
and add that to the previous number and
pop out, and add that to the previous
number until we get our sum.
All right, so if you're used to writing
recursive functions, great, fabulous,
you're gonna feel awesome.
If you're not, your brain might hurt
a little bit when you start thinking about
how to implement stuff that you're used
to doing with imperative iteration,
with functional recursion instead.
And that's why we're here
to practice together, yay.